Improvements in cluster documentation (#1342)
wazuh/wazuh-documentation: source/user-manual/configuring-cluster/index.rst

.. Copyright (C) 2019 Wazuh, Inc.

.. _configuring-cluster:

Deploying a Wazuh cluster
===========================

.. meta::
  :description: A complete user manual about how to configure a Wazuh cluster.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :hidden:

    basics
    advanced-settings
    cluster_management

.. title:: Getting started

.. _gt-cluster:

.. topic:: Cluster nodes configuration

>     The Wazuh cluster is made up by manager type nodes where one of them is the master node and the rest are workers nodes. For both node types, the configuration file ``/var/ossec/etc/ossec.conf`` contains the cluster configuration values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The Wazuh cluster is made up by manager type nodes where one of them is the master node and the rest are worker nodes. For both node types, the configuration file ``/var/ossec/etc/ossec.conf`` contains the cluster configuration values.
```

    Inside the labels ``<cluster>...</cluster>`` are the following configuration values:

        - :ref:`name <cluster_name>`: Name that we will assign to the cluster
        - :ref:`node_name <cluster_node_name>`: Name of the current node
        - :ref:`key <cluster_key>`: The key must be 32 characters long and should be the same for all of the nodes of the cluster. You may use the following command to generate a random one:

            .. code-block:: console

                # openssl rand -hex 16

        - :ref:`node_type <cluster_node_type>`: Set the node type (master/worker)
        - :ref:`port <cluster_port>`: Destination port for cluster communication
        - :ref:`bind_addr <cluster_bind_addr>`: IP where this node is listening to (0.0.0.0 any IP)
        - :ref:`nodes <cluster_nodes>`: The address of the **master** must be specified in all nodes (including the master itself). The address can be either an IP or a DNS.
        - :ref:`hidden <cluster_hidden>`: Toggles whether or not to show information about the cluster that generated an alert.
        - :ref:`disabled <cluster_disabled>`: Indicates whether the node will be enabled or not in the cluster.

>     We are going to configure a cluster with a master node and another worker node, for the **master node** we set the following configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    We are going to configure a cluster with a master node and a single worker node, for the **master node** we set the following configuration:
```

                <key>c98b62a9b6169ac5f67dae55ae4a9088</key>
                <node_type>master</node_type>
                <port>1516</port>
                <bind_addr>0.0.0.0</bind_addr>
                <nodes>
                    <node>master</node>
                </nodes>
                <hidden>no</hidden>
                <disabled>no</disabled>
            </cluster>

    Restart the master node:

        .. code-block:: console

            # systemctl restart wazuh-manager

    Now it is time to configure the **worker node**:

        .. code-block:: xml

            <cluster>
                <name>wazuh</name>
                <node_name>worker01-node</node_name>
                <key>c98b62a9b6169ac5f67dae55ae4a9088</key>
                <node_type>worker</node_type>
                <port>1516</port>
                <bind_addr>0.0.0.0</bind_addr>
                <nodes>
                    <node>master</node>
                </nodes>
                <hidden>no</hidden>
                <disabled>no</disabled>
            </cluster>

    Restart the worker node:

        .. code-block:: console

            # systemctl restart wazuh-manager

>     Let's execute the following command (works on both, worker and master nodes) to check that everything works correctly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Let's execute the following command (works on both worker and master nodes) to check that everything works correctly:
```

    | :ref:`DEB packages <wazuh_server_deb_filebeat>`                        | Install Filebeat on Debian/Ubuntu.                          |
    +------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+

    **Installing Splunk forwarder:**

    +-------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
    | Type                                                              | Description                                                 |
    +===================================================================+=============================================================+
    | :ref:`RPM/DEB packages <splunk_forwarder>`                        | Install Splunk forwarder for RPM or DEB based OS.           |
    +-------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+

.. _deploy_wazuh_agents_cluster:

.. topic:: Pointing agents to the cluster nodes

    Finally, the configuration of the agents has to be modified in order to report to the cluster.

>     In this case the agent 001 will report to the worker01-node node, to achieve this it is necessary to modify the information contained in the labels ``<client><server>`` in the file ``/var/ossec/etc/ossec.conf``, inside we will place the IP of the node we want to report, in our case it would be like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In this case the agent 001 will report to the worker01-node node. To achieve this we must modify the information contained in the labels ``<client><server>`` in the file ``/var/ossec/etc/ossec.conf``, where we will place the IP of the node we want to report to, in our case it would look like this:
```

                    ...
                </server>
            </client>

    Restart the agent:

        .. code-block:: console

            # systemctl restart wazuh-agent

    The second agent will report to the master-node node, for this we will place the IP of our master in the agent configuration, as we have seen in the previous case:

        .. code-block:: xml

            <client>
                <server>
                    <address>MASTER_NODE_IP</address>
                    ...
                </server>
            </client>

    Restart the agent:

        .. code-block:: console

            # systemctl restart wazuh-agent

    Let's execute the following command (works on both, worker and master nodes) to check that the agents are correctly connected:

        .. code-block:: console

            # /var/ossec/bin/agent_control -l

            Wazuh agent_control. List of available agents:
                ID: 000, Name: agent000 (server), IP: 127.0.0.1, Active/Local
                ID: 001, Name: agent001, IP: 172.18.0.5, Active
                ID: 002, Name: agent002, IP: 172.18.0.6, Active

    .. important::

>         We recommend using a :ref:`load balancer <load_balancer>` for connecting the agents. This way the agents will be able to report to the nodes in a distributed way and it will be the balancer the one who assigns to which worker they report, this way the load will be more distributed and in case of a fall in some worker node, their agents will **reconnect** to another one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        We recommend using a :ref:`load balancer <load_balancer>` for connecting the agents. This way the agents will be able to report to the nodes in a distributed way and it will be the load balancer who assigns which worker they report to. Using this option we can better distribute the load and in case of a fall in some worker node, its agents will **reconnect** to another one.
```
